AReviewofRecent Advances in Brain Tumor Diagnosis Based
on AI-Based Classification
RehamKaifi1,2,3
Citation: Kaifi, R. A Review of
Recent Advances in Brain Tumor
Diagnosis Based on AI-Based
Classification. Diagnostics 2023, 13,
3007. https://doi.org/10.3390/
diagnostics13183007
Academic Editors: Dechang Chen,
WanAzani Mustafa and
HiamAlquran
Received: 23 June 2023
Revised: 14 September 2023
Accepted: 19 September 2023
Published: 20 September 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the author.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
1
2
3
Department of Radiological Sciences, College of Applied Medical Sciences, King Saud bin Abdulaziz
University for Health Sciences, Jeddah City 22384, Saudi Arabia; kaifir@ksau-hs.edu.sa
King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Jeddah City 22384, Saudi Arabia
Medical Imaging Department, Ministry of the National Guard—Health Affairs,
Jeddah City 11426, Saudi Arabia
Abstract: Uncontrolled andfast cell proliferation is the cause of brain tumors. Early cancer detection is
vitally important to save many lives. Brain tumors can be divided into several categories depending
on the kind, place of origin, pace of development, and stage of progression; as a result, tumor
classification is crucial for targeted therapy. Brain tumor segmentation aims to delineate accurately
the areas of brain tumors. A specialist with a thorough understanding of brain illnesses is needed
to manually identify the proper type of brain tumor. Additionally, processing many images takes
time and is tiresome. Therefore, automatic segmentation and classification techniques are required to
speed up and enhance the diagnosis of brain tumors. Tumors can be quickly and safely detected by
brain scans using imaging modalities, including computed tomography (CT), magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), and others. Machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) have shown
promise in developing algorithms that aid in automatic classification and segmentation utilizing
various imaging modalities. The right segmentation method must be used to precisely classify
patients with brain tumors to enhance diagnosis and treatment. This review describes multiple
types of brain tumors, publicly accessible datasets, enhancement methods, segmentation, feature
extraction, classification, machine learning techniques, deep learning, and learning through a transfer
to study brain tumors. In this study, we attempted to synthesize brain cancer imaging modalities
with automatically computer-assisted methodologies for brain cancer characterization in ML and DL
frameworks. Finding the current problems with the engineering methodologies currently in use and
predicting a future paradigm are other goals of this article.
Keywords: brain tumors; magnetic resonance imaging; computed tomography; computer-aided
diagnostic and detection; deep learning; machine learning
1. Introduction
The human brain, which serves as the control center for all the body’s organs, is a
highly developed organ that enables a person to adapt to and withstand various environ
mental situations [1]. The human brain allows people to express themselves in words,
carry out activities, and express thoughts and feelings. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), white
matter (WM), and gray matter (GM) are the three major tissue components of the human
brain. The gray matter regulates brain activity and comprises neurons and glial cells. The
cerebral cortex is connected to other brain areas through white matter fibers comprising
several myelinated axons. The corpus callosum, a substantial band of white matter fibers,
connects the left and right hemispheres of the brain [2]. A brain tumor is a brain cell growth
that is out of control and aberrant. Any unanticipated development may affect human
functioning since the human skull is a rigid and volume-restricted structure, depending
on the area of the brain involved. Additionally, it might spread to other organs, further
jeopardizing human functions [3]. Early cancer detection makes the ability to plan effective
treatment possible, which is crucial for the healthcare sector [4]. Cancer is difficult to cure,
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 3007. https://doi.org/10.3390/diagnostics13183007
https://www.mdpi.com/journal/diagnostics
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 3007
2 of 32
and the odds of survival are significantly reduced if it spreads to nearby cells. Undoubtedly,
manylives could be preserved if cancer was detected at its earliest stage using quick and
affordable diagnostic methods. Both invasive and noninvasive approaches may be utilized
to diagnose brain cancer. An incision is made during a biopsy to extract a lesion sample for
analysis. It is regarded as the gold standard for the diagnosis of cancer, where pathologists
examine several cell characteristics of the tumor specimen under a microscope to verify
the malignancy.
Noninvasive techniques include physical inspections of the body and imaging modal
ities employed for imaging the brain [5]. In comparison to brain biopsy, other imaging
modalities, such as CT scans and MRI images, are more rapid and secure. Radiologists
use these imaging techniques to identify brain problems, evaluate the development of
diseases, and plan surgeries [6]. However, brain scans or image interpretation to diagnose
illnesses are prone to inter-reader variability and accuracy, which depends on the medical
practitioner’s competency [5]. It is crucial to accurately identify the type of brain disorder
to reduce diagnostic errors. Utilizing computer-aided diagnostic (CAD) technologies can
improve accuracy. The fundamental idea behind CAD is to offer a computer result as an
additional guide to help radiologists interpret images and shorten the reading time for
images. This enhances the accuracy and stability of radiological diagnosis [7]. Several
CAT-based artificial intelligence techniques, such as machine learning (ML) and deep
learning (DL), are described in this review for diagnosing tissues and segmenting tumors.
The segmentation process is a crucial aspect of image processing. This approach includes a
procedure for extracting the area that helps determine whether a region is infected. Using
MRIimages to segment brain tumors presents various challenges, including image noise,
low contrast, loss borders, shifting intensities inside tissues, and tissue-type variation.
The most complex and crucial task in many medical image applications is detecting
and segmenting brain tumors because it often requires much data and information. Tumors
comeinavariety of shapes and sizes. Automatic or semiautomatic detection/segmentation,
helped by AI, is currently crucial in medical diagnostics. The medical professionals must
authenticate the boundaries and areas of the brain cancer and ascertain where precisely it
rests and the exact impacted locations before therapies such as chemotherapy, radiation, or
brain surgery. This review examines the output from various algorithms that are used in
segmenting and detecting brain tumors.
The review is structured as follows: Types of brain tumors are described in Section 2.
The imaging modalities utilized in brain imaging are discussed in Section 3. The review
algorithms used in the study are provided in Section 4. A review of the relevant state-of
the-art is provided in Section 5. The review is discussed in Section 6. The work’s conclusion
is presented in Section 7.
2. Types of Brain Tumors
The main three parts of the brain are the brain stem, cerebrum, and cerebellum [1].
The cerebellum is the second-largest component of the brain and manages bodily motor
activities, including balance, posture, walking, and general coordination of movements. It
is positioned behind the brain and connected to the brain stem. Internal white matter, tiny
but deeply positioned volumes of gray matter, and a very thin gray matter outer cortex
can all be found in the cerebellum and cerebrum. The brainstem links to the spinal cord.
It is situated at the brain’s base. Vital bodily processes, including motor, sensory, cardiac,
repositories, and reflexes, are all under the control of the brainstem. Its three structural
components are the medulla oblongata, pons, and midbrain [2]. A brain tumor is the
medical term for an unexpected growth of brain cells [8]. According to the tumor’s location,
the kind of tissue involved, and whether they are malignant or benign, scientists have
categorized several types of brain tumors based on the location of the origin (primary
or secondary) and additional contributing elements [9]. The World Health Organization
(WHO)categorized brain tumors into 120 kinds. This categorization is based on the cell’s
origin and behavior, ranging from less aggressive to greater aggressive. Even certain tumor
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 3007
3 of 32
forms are rated, with grades I being the least malignant (e.g., meningiomas, pituitary
tumors) and IV being the most malignant. Despite differences in grading systems that rely
on the kind of tumor, this denotes the pace of growth [10]. The most frequent type of brain
tumor in adults is glioma, which may be classified into HGG and LGG. The WHO further
categorized LGG into I–II grade tumors and HGG into III–IV grade. To reduce diagnosing
errors, accurate identification of the specific type of brain disorder is crucial for treatment
planning. A summary of various types of brain tumors is provided in Table 1.
Table 1. Types of brain tumors.
Types of Tumors Based on
Type
Comment
Benign
Less aggressive and grows slowly
Nature
Malignant
Life-threatening and rapidly
expanding
Primary tumor
Originates in the brain directly
Origin
Secondary tumor
This tumor develops in another
area of the body like lung and
breast before migrating to the brain
Grade I
Basically, regular in shape, and they
develop slowly
Grading
Grade II
Appear strange to the view and
grow more slowly
Grade III
These tumors grow more quickly
than grade II cancers
Grade IV
Reproduced with greater rate
Stage 0
Malignant but do not invade
neighboring cells
Stage 1
Progression stage
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
Malignant and quickly spreading
The malignancy invades every part
of the body
3. Imaging Modalities
For many years, the detection of brain abnormalities has involved the use of several
medical imaging methods. The two brain imaging approaches are structural and functional
scanning [11]. Different measurements relating to brain anatomy, tumor location, traumas,
and other brain illnesses compose structural imaging [12]. The finer-scale metabolic alter
ations, lesions, and visualization of brain activity are all picked up by functional imaging
methods. Techniques including CT, MRI, SPECT, positron emission tomography (PET),
(FMRI), and ultrasound (US) are utilized to localize brain tumors for their size, location as
well as shape, and other characteristics [13].
3.1. MRI
MRIis anoninvasive procedure that utilizes nonionizing, safe radiation [14] to display
the 3D anatomical structure of any region of the body without the need for cutting the
tissue. To acquire images, it employs RF pulses and an intense magnetic field [15].
The body is intended to be positioned within an intense magnetic field. The water
molecules of the human body are initially in their equilibrium state when the magnets
are off. The magnetic field is then activated by moving the magnets. The body’s water
molecules align with the magnetic field’s direction under the effect of this powerful mag
netic field [14]. Protons are stimulated to spin opposing the magnetic field and realiIn addition to the segmentation of the brain cancer region from the MRI scan, the
classification of the tumor into its appropriate type is crucial for diagnosis and treatment
planning, which in today’s medical practice necessitates a biopsy process. Several ap
proaches that use shallow ML and DL have been put forth for classifying brain tumors.
Type shallow ML techniques frequently include preprocessing, ROI identification, and
feature extraction steps. Extracting descriptive information is a difficult task because of the
inherent noise sensitivity associated with MRI image collection as well as differences in the
shape, size, and position of tumor tissue cells. As a result, deep learning algorithms are
currently the most advanced method for classifying many types of brain cancers, includ
ing astrocytomas, gliomas, meningiomas, and pituitary tumors. This review has covered
several classifications of brain tumors.
The noisy nature of an MRI image is one of the most frequent difficulties in ML
based segmentation and classification of brain tumors. To increase the precision of brain
tumor segmentation and classification models, noise estimation and denoising MRI images
is a vital preprocessing operation. As a result, several methods, including the median
f
ilter [115], Wiener filter and DWT [30], and DL-based methods [117], have been suggested
for denoising MRI images.
Large amounts of data are needed for DL models to operate effectively, but there need
to be more datasets available. Data augmentation aids in expanding small datasets and
creating a powerful generalized model. A common augmentation method for MRI images
has yet to be developed. Although many methods have been presented by researchers,
their primary goal is to increase the number of images. Most of the time, they ignore the
connections between space and texture. An identical augmentation technique is required
for comparative analysis to be conducted on its foundation.
7. General Problems and Challenges
Features are first manually extracted for ML, and are then fed into the ML-based
differentiation system. Continuous variation within image classes makes utilizing ML
based algorithms for image classification challenging. Furthermore, the feature extraction
methods’ usage of modern distance metrics makes it impossible to determine the similarity
between two images.
Deep learning analyzes several parameters and optimizes them to extract and select
features on its own. However, the system lacks intelligence in feature selection and typi
cally pools, which reduces parameters and eliminates features that could be useful to the
entire system.
Furthermore, DL models need data, and those data are coupled with millions or tril
lions of parameters. Therefore, enormous amounts of memory and GPU-based computers
are required in the current environment. However, because of their high cost, these devices
are not available to everyone. Consequently, many researchers need to create models that
f
it within their available budgets, which significantly impacts the quality of their study.
The noisy nature of an MRI image is one of the most frequent difficulties in ML-based
brain tumor detection and classification. Preprocessing is necessary to remove all forms of
noise from data and make it more suitable for the task at hand. Preprocessing difficulties
exist in all the available datasets. However, the BRATS datasets have problems, such
as motion artifacts and noise. There is no established preprocessing standard currently.
People employ subpar application software, causing the image quality to decrease rather
than improve.
7.1. Brain Cancer and Other Brain Disorders
7.1.1. Stroke
Hemorrhagic strokes come from blood vessel injury or aberrant vascular structure,
while ischemic strokes occur when the brain’s blood supply is cut off. Although the fact
that strokes and brain tumors are two distinct illnesses, the connections associated with
them have been studied [127].
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 3007
27 of 32
They discovered that stroke patients are more likely than other cancer types to acquire
brain cancer. Another intriguing conclusion of the study is that women between the ages
of 40 and 60 and elderly stroke patients are more likely to acquire brain cancer.
7.1.2. Alzheimer’s Disease
Short-term loss of memoryisaninitialsymptomofAlzheimer’sdisease(AD),achronic
neurodegenerative illness that may become worse over time as the disease progresses [108].
Despite AD andcancer being two distinct diseases, several studies have found a connection
between them. According to the research, there is an inverse association between cancer
and Alzheimer’s disease. They discovered that patients who had cancer had a 33% lower
risk of Alzheimer’s disease than individuals who had not had cancer throughout the course
of a mean follow-up of 10 years. Another intriguing finding of the study was that people
with ADhada61%lowerrisk of developing cancer.
8. Future Directions
The mainapplications of CADx systems are in educating and training; clinical practice
is not one of them. CADx-based systems still need to be widely used in clinics. The
absence of established techniques for assessing CADx systems in a practical environment
is one cause of this. The performance metrics outlined in this study provide a helpful and
necessary baseline for comparing algorithms, but because they are all so dependent on the
training set, more advanced tools are required.
The fact that the image formats utilized to train the models were those characteristics
of the AI research field (PNG) rather than those of the radiology field (DICOM, NIfTI) is
noteworthy. Many of the articles analyzed needed authors with clinical backgrounds.
A different but related technical issue that may affect the performance of CADx
systems in practice is the need for physician training on interacting with and interpreting
the results of such systems for diagnostic decisions. This issue must be dealt with in all the
papers included in the review. In terms of research project relevance and the acceptance of
its findings, greater participation by doctors in the process may be advantageous.
9. Conclusions
Abrain tumor is an abnormal growth of brain tissue that affects the brain’s ability
to function normally. The primary objective in medical image processing is to find ac
curate and helpful information with the minimum possible errors by using algorithms.
The four steps involved in segmenting and categorizing brain tumors using MRI data are
preprocessing, picture segmentation, extracting features, and image classification. The
diagnosis, treatment strategy, and patient follow-up can all be greatly enhanced by au
tomating the segmentation and categorization of brain tumors. It is still difficult to create
a fully autonomous system that can be deployed on clinical floors due to the appearance
of the tumor and its irregular size, form, and nature. The review’s primary goal is to
present the state-of-the-art in the field of brain cancer, which includes the pathophysiology
of the disease, imaging technologies, WHO classification standards for tumors, primary
methods of diagnosis, and CAD algorithms for brain tumor classifications using ML and
DLtechniques. Automating the segmentation and categorization of brain tumors using
deep learning techniques has many advantages over region-growing and shallow ML
systems. DL algorithms’ powerful feature learning capabilities are primarily to blame for
this. Although DL techniques have made a substantial contribution, a general technique
is still needed. This study reviewed 53 studies that used ML and DL to classify brain
tumors based on MRI, and it examined the challenges and obstacles that CAD brain tumor
classification techniques now face in practical application and advancement—a thorough
examination of the variables that might impact classification accuracy. The MRI sequences
and webaddress of the online repository for the dataset are among the publicly available
databases that have been briefly listed in Table 4 and used in the experiments evaluated in
this paper.
Diagnostics 2023, 13, 3007
28 of 32
Funding: This research received no external funding.
Institutional Review Board Statement: Not applicable.
Conflicts of Interest: The author declares no conflict of interest.
References
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
Watson, C.; Kirkcaldie, M.; Paxinos, G. The Brain: An Introduction to Functional Neuroanatomy. 2010. Available online:
http://ci.nii.ac.jp/ncid/BB04049625 (accessed on 22 May 2023).
Jellinger, K.A. The Human Nervous System Structure and Function, 6th edn. Eur. J. Neurol. 2009, 16, e136. [CrossRef]
DeAngelis, L.M. Brain tumors. N. Engl. J. Med. 2001, 344, 114–123. [CrossRef]
Louis, D.N.; Perry, A.; Wesseling, P.; Brat, D.J.; Cree, I.A.; Figarella-Branger, D.; Hawkins, C.; Ng, H.K.; Pfister, S.M.; Reifenberger,
G.; et al. The 2021 WHOClassification of Tumors of the Central Nervous System: A summary. Neuro-Oncology 2021, 23, 1231–1251.
[CrossRef]
Hayward, R.M.; Patronas, N.; Baker, E.H.; Vézina, G.; Albert, P.S.; Warren, K.E. Inter-observer variability in the measurement of
diffuse intrinsic pontine gliomas. J. Neuro-Oncol. 2008, 90, 57–61. [CrossRef]
Mahaley, M.S., Jr.; Mettlin, C.; Natarajan, N.; Laws, E.R., Jr.; Peace, B.B. National survey of patterns of care for brain-tumor
patients. J. Neurosurg. 1989, 71, 826–836. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Sultan, H.H.; Salem, N.M.; Al-Atabany, W. Multi-Classification of Brain Tumor Images Using Deep Neural Network. IEEE Access
2019, 7, 69215–69225. [CrossRef]
Johnson, D.R.; Guerin, J.B.; Giannini, C.; Morris, J.M.; Eckel, L.J.; Kaufmann, T.J. 2016 Updates to the WHO Brain Tumor
Classification System: What the Radiologist Needs to Know. RadioGraphics 2017, 37, 2164–2180. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
Buckner, J.C.; Brown, P.D.; O’Neill, B.P.; Meyer, F.B.; Wetmore, C.J.; Uhm, J.H. Central Nervous System Tumors. Mayo Clin. Proc.
2007, 82, 1271–1286. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
10. World Health Organization: WHO, “Cancer”. July 2019. Available online: https://www.who.int/health-topics/cancer
(accessed on 30 March 2022).
11. Amyot,F.; Arciniegas, D.B.; Brazaitis, M.P.; Curley, K.C.; Diaz-Arrastia, R.; Gandjbakhche, A.; Herscovitch, P.; Hinds, S.R.; Manley,
G.T.; Pacifico, A.; et al. A Review of the Effectiveness of Neuroimaging Modalities for the Detection of Traumatic Brain Injury. J.
Neurotrauma 2015, 32, 1693–1721. [CrossRef]
12. Pope, W.B. Brain metastases: Neuroimaging. Handb. Clin. Neurol. 2018, 149, 89–112. [CrossRef]
13. Abd-Ellah, M.K.; Awad, A.I.; Khalaf, A.A.; Hamed, H.F. A review on brain tumor diagnosis from MRI images: Practical
implications, key achievements, and lessons learned. Magn. Reson. Imaging 2019, 61, 300–318. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
14. Ammari, S.; Pitre-Champagnat, S.; Dercle, L.; Chouzenoux, E.; Moalla, S.; Reuze, S.; Talbot, H.; Mokoyoko, T.; Hadchiti, J.;
Diffetocq, S.; et al. Influence of Magnetic Field Strength on Magnetic Resonance Imaging Radiomics Features in Brain Imaging, an
In Vitro and In Vivo Study. Front. Oncol. 2021, 10, 541663. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
15. Sahoo, L.; Sarangi, L.; Dash, B.R.; Palo, H.K. Detection and Classification of Brain Tumor Using Magnetic Resonance Images.
In Advances in Electrical Control and Signal Systems: Select Proceedings of AECSS, Bhubaneswar, India, 8–9 November 2019; Springer:
Singapore, 2020; Volume 665, pp. 429–441. [CrossRef]
16. Kaur, R.; Doegar, A. Localization and Classification of Brain Tumor using Machine Learning & Deep Learning Techniques. Int. J.
Innov. Technol. Explor. Eng. 2019, 8, 59–66.
17. The Radiology Assistant: Multiple Sclerosis 2.0. 1 December 2021. Available online: https://radiologyassistant.nl/
neuroradiology/multiple-sclerosis/diagnosis-and-differential-diagnosis-3#mri-protocol-ms-brain-protocol
(accessed on 22 May 2023).
18. Savoy, R.L. Functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). In Encyclopedia of Neuroscience; Elsevier: Charlestown, MA, USA, 1999.
19. Luo,Q.; Li, Y.; Luo, L.; Diao, W. Comparisons of the accuracy of radiation diagnostic modalities in brain tumor. Medicine 2018,
97, e11256. [CrossRef]
20. Positron Emission Tomography (PET). Johns Hopkins Medicine. 20 August 2021. Available online: https://www.
hopkinsmedicine.org/health/treatment-tests-and-therapies/positron-emission-tomography-pet (accessed on 20 May 2023).
21. Mayfield Brain and Spine. SPECT Scan. 2022. Available online: https://mayfieldclinic.com/pe-spect.htm (accessed on
22 May2023).
22. Sastry, R.; Bi, W.L.; Pieper, S.; Frisken, S.; Kapur, T.; Wells, W.; Golby, A.J. Applications of Ultrasound in the Resection of Brain
Tumors. J. Neuroimaging 2016, 27, 5–15. [CrossRef]
23. Nasrabadi, N.M. Pattern recognition and machine learning. J. Electron. Imaging 2007, 16, 49901.
24. Erickson, B.J.; Korfiatis, P.; Akkus, Z.; Kline, T.L. Machine learning for medical imaging. Radiographics 2017, 37, 505–515. [CrossRef]
25. Mohan, M.R.M.; Sulochana, C.H.; Latha, T. Medical image denoising using multistage directional median filter. In Proceed
ings of the 2015 International Conference on Circuits, Power and Computing Technologies [ICCPCT-2015], Nagercoil, India,
9–20 March 2015.
26. Borole, V.Y.; Nimbhore, S.S.; Kawthekar, S.S. Image processing techniques for brain tumor detection: A review. Int. J. Emerg.
Trends Technol. Comput. Sci. (IJETTCS) 2015, 4, 2