Medical Progress
114 · N Engl J Med, Vol. 344, No. 2 · January 11, 2001 · www.nejm.org
The New England Journal of Medicine
BRAIN TUMORS
LISA M. DEANGELIS, M.D.
From the Department of Neurology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York. Address reprint requests to Dr. DeAngelis at the Department of Neurology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, 1275
York Ave., New York, NY 10021, or at deangell@mskcc.org.
HE term “brain tumor” refers to a collection
of neoplasms, each with its own biology, prognosis, and treatment; these tumors are better
identified as “intracranial neoplasms,” since some do
not arise from brain tissue (e.g., meningiomas and
lymphomas) (Table 1). However, for most intracranial tumors, the clinical presentation, diagnostic approach, and initial treatment are similar. This article
will focus on general presentation, diagnosis, and specific treatment.
EPIDEMIOLOGY
The American Cancer Society estimates that 16,800
new intracranial tumors were diagnosed in 1999, more
than double the number of diagnosed cases of Hodgkin’s disease and over half the number of cases of melanoma.2 In 1999, primary cancer of the central nervous system was the cause of death in approximately
13,100 people. Metastases to the brain from a systemic primary cancer are even more common; one
estimate suggests that more than 100,000 patients per
year die with symptomatic intracranial metastases.3
For the period from 1950 to 1989, the age- and
sex-adjusted incidence of primary tumors of the central nervous system at the Mayo Clinic was 19.1 per
100,000 persons per year (11.8 per 100,000 for symptomatic tumors and 7.3 per 100,000 for asymptomatic tumors).4 This incidence is almost identical to
that found in the Central Brain Tumor Registry of the
United States, in which the annual rate was 11.47 per
100,000 persons.5 Although data from the Florida
Cancer Registry and other registries showed a significant increase in the incidence of malignant gliomas
and central nervous system lymphomas in the elderly
during the 1980s, other reports showed little or no
change.6,7 These differences can be attributed to ascertainment bias and to improvements in the management of common illnesses, which result in longer
survival and the subsequent emergence of brain tumors that would not have been evident had the patient
died at an earlier age of more common problems.8
Ionizing radiation is the only unequivocal risk factor that has been identified for glial and meningeal
neoplasms. Irradiation of the cranium, even at low
T
doses, can increase the incidence of meningiomas by
a factor of 10 and the incidence of glial tumors by a
factor of 3 to 7,9,10 with a latency period of 10 years
to more than 20 years after exposure. No other environmental exposure or behavior has been clearly
identified as a risk factor. The use of cellular telephones, exposure to high-tension wires, the use of hair
dyes, head trauma, and dietary exposure to N-nitro-
*This table has been abridged and modified from
the World Health Organization classification.1
TABLE 1. HISTOLOGIC CLASSIFICATION OF
TUMORS OF THE CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM.*
Tumors of neuroepithelial tissue
Astrocytic tumors
Astrocytoma
Anaplastic astrocytoma
Glioblastoma multiforme
Pilocytic astrocytoma
Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma
Subependymal giant-cell astrocytoma
Oligodendroglial tumors
Oligodendroglioma
Anaplastic oligodendroglioma
Mixed gliomas
Oligoastrocytoma
Anaplastic oligoastrocytoma
Ependymal tumors
Ependymoma
Anaplastic ependymoma
Myxopapillary ependymoma
Subependymoma
Choroid-plexus tumors
Choroid-plexus papilloma
Choroid-plexus carcinoma
Neuronal and mixed neuronal–glial tumors
Gangliocytoma
Dysembryoplastic neuroepithelial tumor
Ganglioglioma
Anaplastic ganglioglioma
Central neurocytoma
Pineal parenchymal tumors
Pineocytoma
Pineoblastoma
Embryonal tumors
Medulloblastoma
Primitive neuroectodermal tumor
Meningeal tumors
Meningioma
Hemangiopericytoma
Melanocytic tumor
Hemangioblastoma
Primary central nervous system lymphomas
Germ-cell tumors
Germinoma
Embryonal carcinoma
Yolk-sac tumor (endodermal-sinus tumor)
Choriocarcinoma
Teratoma
Mixed-germ-cell tumors
Tumors of the sellar region
Pituitary adenoma
Pituitary carcinoma
Craniopharyngioma
Metastatic tumors
The New England Journal of Medicine is produced by NEJM Group, a division of the Massachusetts Medical Society.
Downloaded from nejm.org by zeina Almansour on March 6, 2026.
 Copyright © 2001 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
MEDICAL PROGRESS
N Engl J Med, Vol. 344, No. 2 · January 11, 2001 · www.nejm.org · 115
sourea compounds or other nutritional factors have
all been reported to increase the risk of brain tumors;
however, the data are conflicting and unconvincing.11-14
CLINICAL PRESENTATION
Brain tumors can cause either focal or generalized
neurologic symptoms. Generalized symptoms reflect
increased intracranial pressure and consist of headache and, when the illness is severe, nausea, vomiting,
and a sixth-nerve palsy. Focal symptoms and signs,
such as hemiparesis and aphasia, reflect the intracranial location of the tumor. The frequency and duration of symptoms vary with the type of tumor (Table
2). For example, a rapidly evolving hemiparesis is more
typical of a high-grade than a low-grade glioma.
Headache occurs in about half of all patients with
brain tumors. Typically, the headache is diffuse, but it
can accurately indicate the hemisphere in which the
tumor is located.15 Generally, the headache is more
noticeable on awakening in the morning and, even
without treatment, dissipates within a few hours. The
headache can occasionally be unilateral and throbbing
and can mimic migraine or even cluster headaches.16
Seizures occur at presentation in 15 to 95 percent
of patients with brain tumors, depending on the type
of tumor (Table 2). Typically, the seizures are focal
but may become generalized and cause loss of consciousness. Postictal hemiparesis or aphasia (Todd’s
phenomenon) may indicate the location of the tumor.
Other symptoms that reflect the location of the
tumor, such as hemiparesis or aphasia not associated
with seizures, typically have a subacute onset and are
progressive. The exception is a visual-field deficit that
may develop progressively but that often goes unnoticed by the patient until it contributes to an accident
(frequently an automobile accident).
DIAGNOSIS
The only test needed to diagnose a brain tumor is
cranial magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Computed tomography (CT) can miss structural lesions, particularly in the posterior fossa, or nonenhancing tumors such as low-grade gliomas. Therefore, if a brain
tumor is a diagnostic consideration, MRI with gadolinium enhancement is the test of choice; a normal
contrast-enhanced MRI scan essentially rules out the
possibility of a brain tumor.
GLIAL TUMORS
Glial tumors are divided into two main categories:
astrocytic and oligodendroglial.1 Both can be either
low grade or high grade. High-grade (malignant) glial
neoplasms can arise either alone (primary glioblastoma) or from a preexisting low-grade tumor (secondary
glioblastoma); in secondary glioblastoma, low-grade
tumor may be immediately adjacent to highly malignant disease. Error can occur when a small sample is
taken for biopsy and the examined tissue does not
reflect the biology of the entire tumor, particularly
if features indicative of malignancy are missed. All gliomas, particularly the astrocytic neoplasms, are histologically, genetically, and thus therapeutically heterogeneous.1,17,18
Glial tumors are graded pathologically, on the basis of the most malignant area identified, according to
either the World Health Organization (WHO) system
or the St. Anne–Mayo system, both of which are based
on the presence or absence of nuclear atypia, mitosis,
microvascular proliferation, and necrosis1 (Fig. 1). Accurate pathological grading is essential because it defines treatment and prognosis. The histologic features
of the tumor and the patient’s age and performance
status are major prognostic factors and have more influence than any specific therapy on the outcome.19,20
Astrocytic Tumors
Astrocytoma
The low-grade fibrillary astrocytoma (WHO grade
II)1,21 must be distinguished from its more benign
counterparts, such as the pilocytic astrocytoma (WHO
grade I) and pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (WHO
grade II). Astrocytomas are tumors found in young
adulthood, with a peak incidence in the third to
fourth decade of life. Typically, the first clinical manifestation is a seizure, which may be accompanied or
followed by other neurologic symptoms or signs. The
diagnosis is usually established when neuroimaging
is performed to evaluate the seizure. The characteristic appearance of an astrocytoma on MRI is that of
a diffuse, nonenhancing mass that is hypointense on
T1-weighted images and best seen on T2-weighted
images or those obtained with the use of fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, on which the mass is brightly outlined against normal brain tissue (Fig. 2). Typically, the lesion has a local mass effect, and there is
evidence of cortical infiltration, with abnormal signal reaching the surface of the brain. Although the
TABLE 2. SYMPTOMS OF BRAIN TUMORS.
SYMPTOM TUMOR TYPE
LOW-GRADE
GLIOMA
MALIGNANT
GLIOMA MENINGIOMA
PRIMARY CENTRAL
NERVOUS SYSTEM
LYMPHOMA
percent with symptom
Headache 40 50 36 35
Seizure 65–95 15–25 40 17
Hemiparesis 5–15 30–50 22 24
Mental-status
abnormalities
10 40–60 21 61
The New England Journal of Medicine is produced by NEJM Group, a division of the Massachusetts Medical Society.
Downloaded from nejm.org by zeina Almansour on March 6, 2026.
 Copyright © 2001 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
116 · N Engl J Med, Vol. 344, No. 2 · January 11, 2001 · www.nejm.org
The New England Journal of Medicine
pathological hallmark of an astrocytoma is that of a
highly infiltrative and nondestructive neoplasm, the
radiologic borders of this tumor are usually distinct.
These lesions have no surrounding edema and, in
young adults, frequently involve the insular cortex.
MRI is often supplemented by positron-emission
tomography (PET), particularly in patients who are
presumed to have low-grade gliomas, which are characterized by glucose hypometabolism.22 PET images
showing diffuse hypometabolism may support a decision to defer surgery or radiation therapy. If hypermetabolic areas are present, indicating the presence
of a high-grade tumor, biopsy or resection should target those areas in an effort to include the most malignant tissue in the pathological specimen.23
Because most patients with astrocytoma are young
and neurologically normal, except for having had an
isolated seizure, treatment is particularly challenging.
When the lesion is amenable to complete surgical excision, resection should be performed. Most neurooncologists believe that resection improves the outcome for patients with low-grade tumors, although
Figure 1. Histologic Criteria of the World Health Organization
for the Classification of Gliomas.
Fibrillary astrocytoma is characterized by increased cellularity
with a monomorphic population of cells infiltrating the neuropil (Panel A, hematoxylin and eosin). Anaplastic astrocytoma is
characterized by nuclear atypia and mitoses (Panel B, hematoxylin and eosin). Glioblastoma multiforme is characterized by necrosis with cells arranged around the edge of the necrotic tissue
(pseudopalisading cells) (Panel C, hematoxylin and eosin); vascular proliferation is apparent at the top of the image.
A
B
C
Figure 2. MRI (Obtained with Fluid-Attenuated Inversion Recovery Sequence) of a Low-Grade Astrocytoma Involving the Left
Frontotemporal Region.
The New England Journal of Medicine is produced by NEJM Group, a division of the Massachusetts Medical Society.
Downloaded from nejm.org by zeina Almansour on March 6, 2026.
 Copyright © 2001 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
MEDICAL PROGRESS
N Engl J Med, Vol. 344, No. 2 · January 11, 2001 · www.nejm.org · 117
others have argued that resection may be deferred
safely in patients who are otherwise asymptomatic
and whose seizures are well controlled with anticonvulsant drugs.24,25 The majority of low-grade tumors
are not amenable to resection, however, because they
involve too large an area of the brain or critical structures such as the language areas.
Radiation therapy is the most effective nonsurgical therapy for astrocytomas; however, early diagnosis
and treatment do not necessarily improve survival and
may cause disability. Three randomized, controlled trials have addressed the effect of radiotherapy on lowgrade astrocytomas. Two multicenter trials have demonstrated equivalence in survival and time to disease
progression between patients who received focal radiotherapy at a low dose (50.4 or 45.0 Gy) at the time of
diagnosis and those who received a high dose (64.8
or 59.4 Gy).26,27 However, higher doses of radiation
were associated with a higher incidence of fatigue or
malaise, insomnia, and poor emotional functioning
months after radiotherapy, suggesting that lower doses are the superior treatment.
Another definitive trial addressed the timing of radiotherapy. After surgery or biopsy, patients were randomly assigned to immediate radiotherapy or deferral
of radiotherapy until there was clinical progression.28
Immediate radiotherapy significantly delayed the time
to progression, but overall survival was identical in
the two groups. The implication is that it makes no
difference whether patients with low-grade astrocytomas receive radiation therapy immediately or only
after they have had a clear progression of symptoms.
Consequently, patients who are neurologically normal
and whose seizures are well controlled with anticonvulsant therapy, whether or not they have undergone
tumor resection, should be followed until there is clear
evidence of progressive neurologic symptoms or signs
or of tumor progression on subsequent MRI or
PET scans.
Some astrocytomas, such as those causing hemiparesis or impaired cognitive function, require immediate intervention. Patients with such astrocytomas
should be treated with surgical debulking, followed
by radiotherapy of the involved field, with a total dose
of no more than 54 Gy. There is no indication for
the routine use of chemotherapy in the treatment of
astrocytomas.
All patients, whether they have received treatment
at presentation or not, must be followed clinically and
radiographically. Most astrocytomas progress to highgrade malignant gliomas, which are often marked by
the appearance of contrast-enhanced areas on MRI
scans or hypermetabolic areas on PET scans. When
progression occurs, treatment usually includes radiotherapy, if it has not previously been administered,
and chemotherapy.
The median survival of patients with low-grade
astrocytomas is five years, and most patients die from
progression of their disease to a high-grade malignant glioma.29,30 The range of survival times is broad
and unpredictable; some patients die early and others survive for a decade or more.31
Malignant Astrocytoma
The malignant astrocytomas, the anaplastic astrocytoma and glioblastoma multiforme, are the most
common glial tumors, with an annual incidence of
3 to 4 per 100,000 population. At least 80 percent
of malignant gliomas are glioblastomas.4 Gliomas can
occur anywhere in the brain but usually affect the
cerebral hemispheres. The male-to-female ratio among
affected patients is about 3:2. The peak age at onset
for anaplastic astrocytomas is in the fourth or fifth
decade, whereas glioblastomas usually present in the
sixth or seventh decade. Most malignant astrocytomas
are sporadic, but they can occasionally complicate genetic syndromes such as neurofibromatosis type 1,
neurofibromatosis type 2, Li–Fraumeni syndrome,
and Turcot’s syndrome.21 There are also examples of
familial brain tumors in the absence of any known genetic syndrome.
Diagnosis is easily established by cranial MRI. Malignant astrocytomas typically have irregular contrast
enhancement, which is often ring-like (Fig. 3). The
lesion is surrounded by edema, and the mass effect
can be severe enough to cause herniation. The tumor
typically involves white matter and can spread across
the corpus callosum and involve both hemispheres.
Although contrast-enhanced MRI suggests the presence of a discrete border to the lesion, these tumors
are widely infiltrative. Tumor cells typically extend
microscopically several centimeters away from the obvious area of disease and, in some cases, can extend
throughout the entire hemisphere or large portions
of the brain — a condition known as gliomatosis
cerebri.32,33
Primary glioblastomas tend to occur in older patients (mean age, 55 years), whereas secondary glioblastomas tend to occur in younger adults (45 years
of age or less).1 The difference between these two
entities can occasionally be recognized radiographically, when regions of nonenhancing tumor are evident in secondary glioblastomas, as well as pathologically, when a surgical specimen contains low-grade
disease. The two types of glioblastoma arise through
different molecular pathways.1 Primary glioblastomas
are associated with a high rate of overexpression or
mutation of the epidermal growth factor receptor, p16
deletions, and mutations in the gene for phosphatase
and tensin homologues (PTEN).34-36 Secondary glioblastomas have genetic alterations involving the p53
gene and overexpression of platelet-derived growth
factor A and its receptor, platelet-derived growth factor receptor a.37 These two pathways clearly demonstrate that the glioblastoma phenotype can arise by
at least two mechanisms.
The New England Journal of Medicine is produced by NEJM Group, a division of the Massachusetts Medical Society.
Downloaded from nejm.org by zeina Almansour on March 6, 2026.
 Copyright © 2001 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
118 · N Engl J Med, Vol. 344, No. 2 · January 11, 2001 · www.nejm.org
The New England Journal of Medicine
The treatments for anaplastic astrocytoma and glioblastoma multiforme are identical. Resection is the
initial intervention. Gross total excision is associated
with longer survival38,39 and improved neurologic
function40; therefore, every effort should be made to
remove as much tumor as possible.
Surgery is followed by involved-field radiotherapy
up to a total dose of 60 Gy, which significantly prolongs survival.41 There have been many efforts to intensify radiotherapy, including the use of radiosensitizers, brachytherapy, and radioactive seeds implanted
in the tumor bed that deliver an additional 60 Gy, but
none have improved survival.42,43 Brachytherapy has
been supplanted by stereotactic radiosurgery, which
is noninvasive and easier to administer. Only tumors
3 cm or less in diameter are amenable to stereotactic
radiosurgery, and only if they are not located immediately adjacent to critical structures such as the optic
nerve or brain stem.44 A randomized controlled study
to assess the benefits of this technique is under way.
The routine use of chemotherapy in addition to
cranial irradiation is controversial. Individual randomized, controlled studies have demonstrated no significant improvement in median survival with single-agent
or multiagent chemotherapy, although a significant
increase in survival has been noted in a meta-analysis.45 However, chemotherapy consistently increases
the proportion of long-term survivors from less than
5 percent to approximately 15 to 20 percent. The
clinical relevance of this increase has been debated,
although the finding is consistent in every study. A
recent analysis established that there is a significant
increase in the proportion of long-term survivors with
the addition of chemotherapy, regardless of the patient’s performance status, the histologic features of
the tumor, the duration of symptoms, or age (up to
65 years).46 The numbers were too small to determine
whether patients over the age of 65 benefit. No clinical feature can identify the patients who are likely to
benefit from chemotherapy. However, recent data
demonstrate that methylation of the promoter region
of the gene for the DNA-repair enzyme O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase predicts tumor responsiveness to alkylating agents.47
The chemotherapeutic agent best studied has been
carmustine. To date, no other drug has proved superior. The combination of procarbazine, lomustine, and
vincristine was reported to improve the survival of
patients with anaplastic astrocytomas; however, a large
retrospective comparison of carmustine and this regimen of combination chemotherapy found no difference in survival between the two treatments, and more
acute toxicity was associated with the combination.48
Other data also suggest that patients who receive combination chemotherapy do not respond as well as those
who receive a single agent as part of the initial treatment.49
At the time of recurrence, a second resection should
be considered. By itself, repeated resection has been
shown to prolong survival for a median of six months.
If it has not been used earlier, stereotactic radiosurgery may be considered for discrete, focal recurrences. Additional chemotherapy can also be useful. Traditional agents have included nitrosourea drugs, if not
used initially, and procarbazine. The efficacy of temozolomide in the treatment of recurrent malignant
gliomas has been demonstrated.50 Temozolomide,
which is administered orally, has a favorable side-effect
profile and thus is well tolerated by most patients.
Thalidomide has been tested as an antiangiogenic
agent, but the results have been disappointing51; its
weak antiangiogenic effect indicates that stronger
agents may be more successful. Other approaches,
such as gene therapy with the herpes simplex thymidine kinase gene, have also been ineffective,52 but
the trials were conducted early in the development
of gene-therapy technology.
Despite aggressive treatment, most patients die of
the disease, with median survival of about three years
for anaplastic astrocytoma and one year for glioblastoma. The few long-term survivors of glioblastoma are
usually young, in good health, and able to undergo
gross total resection of their lesion, followed by radiotherapy and chemotherapy.19
Figure 3. MRI of a Glioblastoma Multiforme in the Left Frontal
Lobe, Obtained after the Administration of Gadolinium.
The irregular enhancing margin with central necrosis is characteristic of the tumor.
The New England Journal of Medicine is produced by NEJM Group, a division of the Massachusetts Medical Society.
Downloaded from nejm.org by zeina Almansour on March 6, 2026.
 Copyright © 2001 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
MEDICAL PROGRESS
N Engl J Med, Vol. 344, No. 2 · January 11, 2001 · www.nejm.org · 119
Oligodendroglial Tumors
Oligodendrogliomas and oligoastrocytomas are tumors of oligodendrocytes or their precursors, or they
have composite histologic features, reflecting both oligodendrocytic and astrocytic cells. Formerly, the distinction between an oligodendroglial tumor and an
astrocytic tumor had no therapeutic importance, and
in earlier series of tumors, oligodendrogliomas represented approximately 5 percent of glial neoplasms.
However, with the recent recognition that oligodendrogliomas are uniquely sensitive to chemotherapy,
neuropathologists have made a greater effort to identify these uncommon neoplasms. The consequence is
that they are now found to represent approximately
20 percent of glial neoplasms, and this is probably a
more accurate estimate.53 Oligodendrogliomas are divided into two categories, low grade and high grade
(anaplastic), which are of both prognostic and therapeutic use.21
The distinction between an astrocytoma and an
oligodendroglioma, when made purely on histologic
grounds, can be difficult. However, many oligodendrogliomas have deletions of 1p and 19q,54 and molecular changes such as these may prove to be the defining criteria for this type of tumor. New data now
link chemosensitivity to the loss of heterozygosity at
1p and 19q in low-grade and high-grade oligodendrogliomas.55,56
Low-Grade Oligodendroglioma
The majority of oligodendrogliomas are low grade
and radiographically indistinguishable from astrocytomas, although oligodendrogliomas are more likely
to be calcified. These oligodendroglial tumors are
prone to spontaneous hemorrhage, as a result of their
delicate vasculature; even a low-grade tumor may
present as an intracranial hemorrhage. Most patients
present with a seizure or progressive hemiparesis or
cognitive impairment. Those who have a hemorrhage
generally present with hemiparesis, headache, and lethargy, all of acute onset.
The issues concerning diagnosis and treatment are
identical to those for low-grade astrocytomas. Treatment is deferred until there is clinical or radiologic
evidence of progression, unless patients have disabling
symptoms or signs at presentation. However, once
the decision to initiate treatment is made, the therapy differs from that used for astrocytomas.
Conventional treatment with focal radiotherapy, up
to a total dose of 54 Gy, improves symptoms and
probably prolongs survival. However, in 1988 it was
recognized that malignant oligodendrogliomas are
sensitive to chemotherapy.57 A regimen of procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine resulted in marked
shrinkage of tumors, as shown by neuroimaging. Subsequent studies established the beneficial effect of chemotherapy in malignant oligodendrogliomas, with
75 percent of patients responding to treatment and
roughly 50 percent of these patients recovering completely.58,59 Procarbazine, lomustine, and vincristine
were then used for low-grade oligodendrogliomas, and
again responses were observed.59,60 Chemotherapy is
probably not curative in patients with this disease, but
it can produce sustained remissions with durable clinical improvement.
Earlier studies of patients with oligodendrogliomas
reported a median survival of about 10 years, which
is much longer than the median survival of patients
with astrocytomas. MRI has led to earlier diagnosis,
and a recent series of 106 patients with oligodendrogliomas yielded a median survival of 16 years.61 Many
patients can be followed for years without intervention. When treatment is implemented, it appears that
the outcomes are equivalent regardless of the type of
treatment, be it chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or both.
I prefer to use chemotherapy initially, because it delays the administration of radiotherapy and thus postpones the long-term cognitive consequences of radiotherapy in patients who survive for lengthy periods.
Eventually, most oligodendrogliomas, like astrocytomas, progress by becoming malignant. Patients with
worsening clinical symptoms and the appearance of
enhancement on MRI scans or hypermetabolism on
PET scans warrant reevaluation. Resection or biopsy
is often performed, and further therapy is chosen on
the basis of histologic features and prior treatment.
Anaplastic Oligodendroglioma
Like malignant astrocytic tumors, anaplastic oligodendrogliomas require immediate treatment after diagnosis. Extensive resection should be performed if
feasible. Many physicians initiate treatment with chemotherapy, using the combination of procarbazine,
lomustine, and vincristine, followed by radiotherapy.62 The use of chemotherapy before radiotherapy
allows one to measure a response to treatment if there
is residual tumor. Agents that appear to have some
efficacy against recurrent oligodendroglial tumors include melphalan, thiotepa, temozolomide, carboplatin, cisplatin, and etoposide.
MENINGIOMA
Meningiomas are not strictly brain tumors, since
they arise from meningothelial cells that form the external membranous covering of the brain. However,
because they arise within the intracranial cavity and
present with neurologic symptoms and signs, they are
usually classified as brain tumors. They constitute approximately 20 percent of intracranial neoplasms4,21
and have a total annual incidence of 7.8 per 100,0004;
however, the majority are asymptomatic tumors discovered incidentally at autopsy. Their incidence in
symptomatic patients is about 2 per 100,000. Meningiomas occur more frequently in women, with a
female-to-male ratio of 3:2 or even 2:1 in some series.1 Multiple meningiomas are found in patients with
The New England Journal of Medicine is produced by NEJM Group, a division of the Massachusetts Medical Society.
Downloaded from nejm.org by zeina Almansour on March 6, 2026.
 Copyright © 2001 Massachusetts Medical Society. All rights reserved, including those for text and data mining, AI training, and similar technologies.
120 · N Engl J Med, Vol. 344, No. 2 · January 11, 2001 · www.nejm.org
The New England Journal of Medicine
neurofibromatosis type 2 or can develop sporadically, usually from contiguous spread from a clonal tumor63,64; sporadic multiple meningiomas are found in
less than 10 percent of patients. Patients with breast
cancer have an increased frequency of meningiomas,
which need to be distinguished from metastases to
the brain.65
Meningiomas occur primarily at the base of the
skull, in the parasellar regions, and over the cerebral
convexities. Thus, symptoms and signs directly reflect
the location of the tumor. Most meningiomas are
slow growing and are not associated with substantial
underlying brain edema; they cause symptoms by the
compression of adjacent neural structures. Patients
with tumors of the hemispheric convexities often
present with a seizure or progressive hemiparesis. Patients with skull-based lesions typically present with
cranial neuropathy, whereas meningiomas in any location may cause headache.
The diagnosis of meningioma is established by
neuroimaging. On MRI, meningiomas are adjacent
to bone and usually have a “dural tail,” which indicates
that the tumor is anchored to the dura and growing
along it (Fig. 4). They have a characteristic diffuse
pattern of enhancement. If substantial brain edema is
evident, it usually indicates a higher-grade tumor or
a secretory meningioma.66
The majority of meningiomas are histologically
benign. Approximately 5 percent are atypical, and
2 percent are frankly malignant. Several histologic
variants exist, but only a few have prognostic importance. Apart from the meningiomas that have atypical or frankly malignant features, clear-cell, chordoid,
rhabdoid, and papillary meningiomas have a greater
propensity to recur and exhibit aggressive behavior.1,21
Radiation-induced meningiomas are more commonly
atypical or malignant.9,67 All meningiomas are characterized by the loss of chromosome 22q, which is also
the molecular characteristic of neurofibromatosis 2.68
Small meningiomas, which are often detected incidentally on images obtained for other reasons, may
simply be followed, particularly in older patients.69,70
Many remain static and never cause neurologic symptoms. In those that grow, intervention can be instituted as needed.
When treatment is necessary, surgery is the definitive therapy. However, even among tumors that are
completely resected, 20 percent recur within 10 years,
and more than 80 percent recur after a partial resection. Tumors at the skull base are frequently impossible to remove because they are intertwined with vital
structures. Stereotactic radiosurgery is another initial
treatment option for tumors less than 3 cm in diameter and not adjacent to the optic nerve or other critical structures. At the time of a recurrence, a second
resection should be followed by external-beam radiotherapy, which slows regrowth.71 If a focal area of
disease remains, stereotactic radiosurgery may be useful.72 Patients with multiple recurrences typically undergo craniotomy many times and exhaust their radiotherapeutic options. Chemotherapy for meningiomas has been disappointing. Although initial reports
of hydroxyurea and doxorubicin-based regimens were
enthusiastic, most studies found these regimens to
be ineffective.73,74 Patients with atypical and anaplastic tumors require radiotherapy as part of the initial
treatment; despite this vigorous approach, however,
most aggressive meningiomas recur.75
PRIMARY CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM
LYMPHOMA
Primary central nervous system lymphoma was believed to represent 1 percent or less of all primary
brain tumors, but in the past two decades its incidence has tripled in the United States.76,77 Congenital or acquired immunosuppression, particularly the
acquired immunodeficiency syndrome, markedly increases the risk of primary central nervous system
lymphoma.76 There are no known environmental or
behavioral risk factors associated with this disease
that might explain its rising incidence in immunocompetent patients.